---
layout: post
title:  "To Buy or Not to Buy: Mining Airfare Data to Minimize Ticket Purchase Price"
tags: [recsys, paper]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

A review of an ACM KDD 2003 paper by Etzioni, Knoblock, Tuchinda, Yates, about predicting when to buy flights.
<!--more-->

Available: https://www.isi.edu/integration/papers/etzioni03-kdd.pdf

### Introduction and Motivation

Companies use complex policies to vary product prices over time. Airline products are further complicated by fare classes, sales channels, etc.

Given the online availability of price data, this paper looks at using data mining to help customers decide when to buy an airline ticket. Questions: (a) what is the behavior of airline ticket prices over time? (b) what data mining methods are able to detect patterns in price data? (c) can web price tracking couple with data mining save consumer money in practice?

### Data Collection

Data collection is based on crawling a major travel web site at 3-hour intervals. For this study, only collected data on non-stop, round trip between LAX-BOS and SEA-IAD; departures spanned January 2003 with the return flight 7 days later. For each flight, recorded the lowest fare available for an economy ticket and also logged when economy tickets were sold out. Over 12k fare observations were collected over a 41 day period. Small amount of data was missing due to errors.

#### Pricing Behavior

Price tickets on a particular flight change as often as 7 times in a single day.
* Dependent change: prices of similar flights from the airline change at the same time; e.g., airlines adjusting prices for revenue yield.
* Independent change: prices of similar flights do _not_ change. Could be due to changes in seat availability. 

Round trip prices can vary significantly over time. Many flights have 2-4 discernible price tiers.

Price matching plays an important role: airlines track their competitor's pricing history and propose adjustments that optimize their overall revenue. Price changes need to be submitted to the Airline Tariff Publishing Company; the entire process can take up to 1 day.

Pricing strategy differs between the 'big players' and smaller airlines that concentrate on selling low-price tickets. Strategies seem to be similar within airline groups. Big players: expensive and fluctuate often. Common policies: fare increase 2 weeks before departure, and maximum value on departure date.

### Related Work

Keywords: temporal data mining, time series analysis (e.g., computational finance). In stock markets, pricing is dictated by supply/demand, rather than by hidden algorithms — the prices therefore move in smaller increments.

### Data Mining Methods

Goal is to learn whether to buy a ticket or wait at a particular point in time, for a particular flight, given the price history that is recorded. Temporal ordering of data is enforced.

1. Rule Learning (Ripper). Each price observation is represented as [flight number, hours until departure, current price, airline, route] and label = [buy, wait]. Other features did not improve ripper's performance. Classification accuracy is not a great metric; a single misclassification can have varying effect on purchase price. Mixed results from metacost metric.
2. Q-learning is a 'species of' reinforcement learning. The resulting state from the 'buy' action is terminal (no future rewards), while the immediate reward for the 'wait' action is 0 as long as tickets do not sell out. Future rewards are not discounted. A penalty for waiting until a flight sells out is introduced: the reward is a constant negative value that is beyond the price of any flight. Additionally introduce the notion of 'equivalence classes' - flights on the same route that depart at different days, but are at the same number of hours before departure.
3. Time Series. This paper: first order moving average model. This history is a fixed window of (one week of) price observations. The weight is a linearly increasing function. The decision is 'buy' if a model predicts that the next price will be higher, and 'wait' otherwise - decisions are made at a single time step.
4. Stacked Generalization (Hamlet). Ensemble based learning; combining the outputs of the learning approaches (above). Added three features corresponding to class labels (buy or wait) computed by other learners, and then run ripper over the augmented data.
5. Hand crafted rule: (a) do not wait too long - buy if the price has not dropped within 7 days of the departure date, (b) compute an expectation for the lowest price of the flight in the future based on similar flights in the training data; buy if the current price is lower than the expected price.

### Experimental Results

Evaluation by simulation: generate one passenger for each fare observation (4,488). For each time point, the algo decides whether the user should buy or wait. The process continues until the user buys or the tickets sell out, in which case they buy a higher priced business class ticket. Recorded the price o the ticket purchased and the optimal price in the subsequent data and compute savings. Hamlet outperforms all models to achieve net savings of just under $200k - 61.8% of optimal.

Constraints: for close to 75% of the test users, no savings were possible because prices never dropped. Users 'appeared' a max of 21 days before a flight; 33% of passengers arrived at most 7 days before a flight. Varied experiments by changing user-arrival distribution as well as by offering a 'fly at any time' option. 

